https://www.vegrecipesofindia.com/vada-pav-how-to-make-wada-pav/Dassana's Veg Recipes
Follow Us
Facebook
YouTube
Pinterest
Twitter
Instagram
Home » Recipes » Maharashtrian Recipes
By Dassana AmitLast Updated: June 5, 2021
Vegan4.93 from 39 votes • 56 Comments
Vada pav is a savory dinner roll stuffed with fried mashed and spiced potato fritters. It is a popular vegan street food snack eaten in Mumbai and rest of Maharashtra. This dish is full of flavors and various textures! 
Table of Contents
Vada pav is sold in shops, outside of schools and colleges all over Mumbai because it is so popular and loved by street food lovers.
It is one of the most humble street foods in Mumbai, yet it is tasty and delicious. Vada pav basically has Batata vada which is sandwiched between two slices of a pav (dinner roll) topped with sweet chutney, green chutney, and dry garlic chutney. 
Batata vada are fried batter coated potato dumpling fritters. The batter is made with nutty gram flour (besan) and spices. The filling consist of savory, spiced mashed potatoes. 
Batata means potato Marathi language. While the term vada mostly means a fried fritter or a fried dumpling-like savory dish.
Throughout my childhood, I ate vada pav in many places in Mumbai and it was always so delicious! Even today I still make sure that I buy vada pav whenever I visit Mumbai. However, when I am craving vada pav and can’t get to Mumbai, so I make them at home.
Pav means a small loaf of bread in Indian and is the same as dinner rolls. They are made with all purpose flour or whole wheat flour and can be bought from bakeries, super stores and sweet shops in India. 
Vada pav can be eaten during any time of the day like breakfast, brunch, or in the evening as a snack. It goes very well with Indian chai, fried green chilies, and chutney like coriander chutney or mint chutney or green chutney.
To make vada pav you need five elements:
Make seriously awesome vada pav with my step-by-step guide! In this guide, I have shared how to make potato vada in detail. The green chutney and sweet chutney recipes are also in the recipe card below. 
1. Boil 2 large potatoes that weigh about 350 grams. Peel and then mash them with a fork in a bowl.
You can boil or steam the potatoes in a pan, Instant pot or pressure cooker. Remember to drain the water very well from the boiled potatoes before you mash them. 
Also crush 6 to 7 small/medium-sized garlic cloves and 1 to 2 green chilies in a mortar pestle. 
2. Heat 2 to 3 teaspoons of oil in a small pan. Add ½ a teaspoon of mustard seeds and crackle them. Then add 7 to 8 curry leaves and a pinch of asafoetida (hing). Stir and sauté for about 5 seconds.
3.  Add the crushed garlic cloves and green chilies mixture to the pan. Add ⅛ teaspoon of turmeric powder (about 2 to 3 pinches).
4. Stir for some seconds or until the raw aroma of garlic goes away.
5. Pour this tempering mixture together with the oil to the mashed potatoes.
6. Add 1 to 2 tablespoons of chopped coriander leaves and salt as required.
7. Mix everything well. Then make small to medium balls from the mashed potato mixture. Flatten these balls a bit. Cover and keep aside.
8. In another bowl, make a smooth batter from 1 to 1.25 cups besan (gram flour), ⅛ teaspoon turmeric powder (about 2 to 3 pinches), a pinch of asafoetida (hing), a pinch of baking soda (optional), salt and ½ cup water or as needed. The batter should have a medium-thick flowing consistency. It should not be too thick or thin. If the batter becomes thin, add 1 or 2 tablespoons of gram flour. If the batter becomes thick, then add 1 or 2 tablespoons of water. 
9. Dip the slightly flattened potato balls in the batter and coat it evenly with the batter.
10. Before you dip the batata vada in the batter, heat oil in a pan or wok (kadai). When the oil becomes hot then dip the batata vada in the batter to coat as shown in the above steps.
Carefully and gently drop these batter coated potato balls in medium hot oil. 
Note: You can read more details on the frying temperature in the ‘expert tips’ section below.
11. Depending on the size of the kadai or pan, you can add more or less of the vada while frying. But don’t overcrowd the pan
12. When one side firms up, becomes slightly crisp and golden then only turn over gently with a slotted spoon. Fry the second side. This way deep fry them till golden, turning a couple of times as needed.
13. Drain them on kitchen paper towels. Make all batata vada this way and set aside.
14. Serve them when they are still hot or warm. Put all the chutneys and pav on your work surface. Slice the pav without breaking it into two parts and set aside. 
If you don’t have sweet chutney, then make the vada pav with green chutney. The green chutney and sweet chutney recipes are in the recipe card below. 
You can make these two chutney recipes some hours ahead or a day before and refrigerate. 
15. Spread both the green chutney and sweet chutney on the sliced pav. You can also spread green chutney on one side and sweet chutney on the other side.
16. Sprinkle the dry garlic chutney on the pav. This step is optional and you can skip it if you don’t have garlic chutney.
17. Place the hot batata vada in the bread slices.
18. Serve vada pav immediately or else the pav becomes soggy. You can also serve some salted fried green chilies and both of the chutneys with it. 
It makes for a good filling evening snack high on carbs. A cup of hot tea or coffee can also be served as a side beverage.
I have read that Vada pav was invented by Ashok Vaidya at a stall outside Dadar railway station in 1966. 
You can eat vada pav with dry garlic coconut chutney, green chutney, sweet tamarind chutney, Indian chai or fried salted green chilies. 
Batata vada means potato fritter in Marathi and is a combination of potato (batata) and vada. Pav comes from the Portuguese word pão which means bread.
More Delicious Mumbai Street Food Recipes
Easy • 35 mins
Street Food Recipes
Pani Puri
Easy • 30 mins
Street Food Recipes
Bhel Puri
Moderate • 45 mins
Street Food Recipes
Sev Puri (Indian Chaat Snack)
Moderate • 50 mins
Street Food Recipes
Ragda Patties | Ragda Pattice
By Dassana Amit
Share
Like what you see?
Stay up to date with new recipes and ideas.
This Vada Pav recipe post from the blog archives (first published on August 2009) has been republished and updated on 5 June 2021.
Share This Recipe:
Meet Dassana
Welcome to Dassana's Veg Recipes. I share vegetarian recipes from India & around the World. Having been cooking for decades and with a professional background in cooking & baking, I help you to make your cooking journey easier with my tried and tested recipes showcased with step by step photos & plenty of tips & suggestions.
Comments are closed.
Awesome recipe, so simple to follow. I just have one doubt. If I prepare the vada few hours before serving then how do I reheat it?
Thank you. The vada taste best when it is hot. I would recommend to make them when you plan to serve them. On cooling the texture and the taste will change slightly. Of course you can reheat in an oven, but a piping hot vada in a pav with the assorted chutneys is an experience to relish.
See More Comments
Meet Dassana
Hi, I am Dassana. Running the kitchen for decades, I share tried and tested Vegetarian recipes on my food blog since 2009, with a step-by-step photo guide & plenty of tips so that your cooking journey is easier. I also have a professional background in cooking & baking.
Follow Us
Facebook
YouTube
Pinterest
Twitter
Instagram
Popular Recipes
Paneer Recipes
Paneer Butter Masala
Dal (Lentils) & Legumes
Dal Makhani
Chickpeas Recipes
Chana Masala | Punjabi Chole Masala
South Indian Food
Sambar Recipe
Snacks Recipes
Samosa Recipe (Punjabi Samosa)
Dal (Lentils) & Legumes
Rajma Recipe | Rajma Masala | Rajma Chawal
Street Food Recipes
Pav Bhaji Recipe (2 Ways)
Breakfast Recipes
Masala Dosa
Popular Baking Recipes
Bread Recipes
Banana Bread (Eggless and Vegan)
World Recipes
Eggless Chocolate Chip Cookies
Bread Recipes
Pizza Recipe | Veg Pizza
Cake Recipes
Eggless Chocolate Cake Recipe
As Seen In:
Follow Us
Facebook
YouTube
Pinterest
Twitter
Instagram
© Dassana’s Veg Recipes 2009-2022

Friend's Email Address



Your Name



Your Email Address



Comments



Send Email

https://hebbarskitchen.com/vada-pav-recipe-make-vada-pav-wada-pav/vada pav recipe | how to make vada pav | wada pav with detailed photo and video recipe. a popular indian street food recipe prepared mainly with pav bread and deep fried batata vada stuffing. most commonly, this snack is also referred as indian burger or aka bombay burger because it hails from maharashtra or marathi cuisine. generally, it is served as an evening snack, but can also be adapted to breakfast.
unlike the traditional burger recipe, vada pav recipe is much easier and quicker to prepare and assemble it. the critical part of any good wada pav recipe lies in its crispy and savoury vada or batata vada. these patties are slightly different from the conventional aloo bonda or vegetable bonda. basically, the batata vada stuffing is mainly made from potatoes without onion or peas combination. also, it contains a strong flavour of garlic, ginger and coriander leaves. moreover, the patties are typically oval shaped as compared to round bonda’s. having said that, it is not mandatory and can be shaped to round and then later pressed while assembling it.

the vada pav recipe is extremely simple to prepare, yet i would like to add few tips and recommendations while preparing. firstly, ensure the boiled and mashed potatoes are moisture free and removed immediately from pressure cooker after it is cooked. if you feel you mashed potatoes contain moisture, fry them in a pan for 2-3 minutes to remove it. secondly, i have added baking soda to the besan batter to make vadas crisper. also, add 1 tbsp of rice flour/cornflour to make it even crisper. lastly, these vada pav should be served immediately after deep frying and assembling. alternatively, you can place the deep fried vadas in a preheated oven or even deep fry again for 1 minute if serving later.
finally, i request you to check my other street food recipes collection with this post of how to make vada pav recipe. it includes recipes like pav bhaji, misal pav, bhel puri, sev puri, aloo bonda, vegetable bonda, samosa chaat, dahi puri, aloo chaat and pani puri recipe. further, i request you to visit my other similar recipes collection like,

gulab jamun recipe | how to...
Diwali sweets recipes | 150+ Deepavali...
besan ladoo recipe | besan ke...
instant chakli recipe | instant rice...
kaju katli recipe | kaju barfi...
rava laddu recipe | rava ladoo...
Please subscribe to our newsletter to get the latest news in your domain of interest. Don't forget to follow us on social networks!
© Hebbars Kitchen Indian Veg Recipes | All Rights Reserved
https://www.cookwithmanali.com/vada-pav/Home » Recipes » Indian Street Food
Mumbai’s popular street food, Vada Pav – spicy potato filling sandwiched between buns and layers of spicy garlic and green chutney!

Vada Pav is one of Mumbai’s most famous food. It’s almost synonyms with the city, in fact I remember when I was in Mumbai few years back, it was one of my goals to eat vada pav! This popular street food is loved by one and all.
So what exactly is a Vada Pav? Vada = deep fried potato patties and pav = burger buns. You can say it’s kind of a potato sandwich or burger but what makes it so special is all the chutneys that go with it!
My very first memories of eating vada pav goes back to 2004. We went to Mumbai that year to celebrate new year. And we literally gorged on all of Mumbai’s famous street food like pav bhaji, tawa pulao, bombay sandwich. Oh everything was so good!

I really feel that you have to go to Mumbai to get that authentic taste of all these delicacies. I grew up around Delhi and the pav bhaji or vada pav could never match up to the one in Mumbai. I realized this after I ate the real deal!
Anyway coming back to Vada Pav. This recipe has 4 main ingredients – the vada, the dry garlic coconut chutney, the green chutney and the sweet tamarind chutney. You can skip the green and sweet chutney if you have no time for it but I highly recommend not skipping the garlic chutney. It’s what makes the vada pav in my opinion.
This is a long recipe and does take some amount of prep work. But trust me, one bite into these deliciousness and it will all seem worth it!

 
You can make homemade vada pav in 8 main steps-
1. Make the garlic coconut chutney
2. Make the green chutney
3. Make the tamarind chutney
4. Make the potato balls aka the vada
5. Make the batter to dip the vadas
6. Fry the vada in hot oil
7. Heat up the pav (buns)
8. And finally assemble it all together!
As you can see there are multiple steps and if you don’t have time to do all of these on one day, I suggest making the chutneys in advance. This way, you only have to make the vada when you want to eat it. Saves so much time! The chutneys all stay quite good in the refrigerator for week.
Now let’s talk about each of these in detail!

This is a dry chutney made with garlic, coconut and red chili powder. It’s supposed to be quite spicy and one of the main chutneys for the vada pav. If you guys have been following me for a while, you would know that I can’t eat very spicy food.
So the spice levels of this chutney have been adjusted to me taste. You can add more chili powder depending on how spicy you want your chutney to be.
The very famous green chutney is an integral part of so many Indian dishes. It’s one chutney which I always have in my refrigerator. This one for the vada pav is made with cilantro, chilies, garlic, cumin and lime juice.
You may add ginger or mint to the chutney too. I also added a little sugar to the chutney which is completely optional.

Tamarind chutney is traditionally made by soaking the tamarind in water and then cooking the pulp with spices and water.
For this recipe, I made an easy tamarind chutney with ready to use tamarind paste. Just mix the paste with water and spices and let it boil until it thickens.
Vada is made by deep frying spiced potato balls/rounds. So you start by boiling the potatoes. Once the potatoes are boiled, you mash them and then temper the mashed potatoes with simple spices like mustard seeds, hing (asafetida) and curry leaves. Then make balls out of the potato mixture and then fry them in hot oil after coating them in a chickpea batter.
Once you have all the components of the vada pav ready to to, you start by heating up the pav with little butter. Then apply all the 3 prepared chutneys on both sides of the pav. Place the vada in between the two buns and serve with some more chutney.
Now that you know all the steps, let see how we make the very famous Vada Pav!

 
Make the garlic chutney
Heat 2 teaspoons of oil in a pan on medium heat.
Then add garlic cloves and fry for 1-2 minutes until garlic turns slightly brown in color. Set aside on a tissue.
To the same pan, add freshly grated coconut. Cook for 2 minutes until light golden brown.

Transfer coconut to a blender.
Add toasted garlic, salt and red chili powder.
Grind to a coarse chutney. Set aside.

Make the green chutney
To a blender add cilantro. Discard the hard stems, the softer ones are okay to use.
Add green chili, garlic, cumin powder, salt, sugar (if using) and lime juice. Add 1 tbsp water or as needed.
Blend to a fine paste and set it aside.

Make the tamarind chutney
To a pan add water, tamarind paste, jaggery, sugar, salt, red chili powder, cumin powder and ginger powder. Bring mixture to a boil.
Reduce heat to medium and let it boil for 3-4 minutes until the chutney turns thick and coats the back of a spoon.
Set it aside to cool. It will thicken more as it cools down.

Make the vada
Boil the potatoes until soft, peel them and set them aside. Using a mortar and pestle, crush the ginger, garlic and green chili. Set it aside.
Heat 1 tablespoon oil in pan on medium heat. Once the oil is hot, add the mustard seeds and let them pop.
Then add the curry leaves and hing and mix.
Add the crushed ginger-garlic-green chili. Cook for one minute until the ginger and garlic starts changing color.

Now add the boiled potatoes and remove pan from heat. Add turmeric, salt and mash the potatoes using a potato masher.
Add chopped cilantro and mix well.
Now make lemon sized balls out of the potato mixture. I was able to get 10 of these. Set these aside.

Make the batter
To make the batter, take besan in a large bowl. Add turmeric, salt and pinch of baking soda to it.
Start adding water, little by little to the bowl.
Whisk to form a smooth batter. You may need couple of extra tablespoons of water to reach a desired consistency. The batter should neither be thick nor thin.

Fry the vada
Heat oil in a kadai/wok on medium-high heat. Dip each potato round into the batter, coat it from all sides.
Then drop it carefully into the hot oil.
Fry the vada in hot oil until golden brown in color. Fry all vadas in a similar way. Drain on a paper towel.

Assemble the vada pav
To assemble the vada pav, toast the pav with some butter on a pan.
Then slice each pav but not entirely. It should still be attached at one end. Apply green chutney on one side and tamarind chutney on the other side of the pav. Then apply garlic chutney on top of these chutneys.
Place the fried vada in the center.

Serve the vada pav immediately with more chutney on the side!


Great recipe, quick and easy , thanks for sharing

Interesting I must try to make the chutneys, filling not difficult.

Awesome. Want to make for a party. What temperature should I reheat and how much time. I will fry them the same day but want to keep it warm as I want to make ahead (3-4 hrs). Pls let me know
to keep warm, make everything and keep in the oven at 200 F degrees, that will keep these warm
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment 
Name * 
Email * 
Website 
 



Δ
Bringing you easy, delicious vegetarian & vegan recipes! Eating veggies can be fun, you just need to get creative in the kitchen with the right set of ingredients!
Signup and get a free copy of my e-book on 15 Easy Instant Pot Dinner Recipes
Whether it’s your favorite Indian takeout or the regular lentils and beans, these 75 new recipes will show you how easy it is to cook your favorite Indian meal in the Instant Pot.
https://www.indianhealthyrecipes.com/vada-pav-recipe/Swasthi's Recipes
Indian food blog with easy Indian recipes
By swasthi, June 7, 2021 20 Comments, Jump to Recipe
Vada pav recipe with video and step by step photos – Vada pav is a popular street food from India. It originated in the streets of Mumbai as a fast food that was cheap and affordable even by a common man. To make vada pav, batata vada is sandwiched in Indian bun which is known as pav.
These Batata vada are potato balls that are dipped in chickpea flour batter and deep fried. To add some zing various chutneys are spreaded generously. 
These are accompanied by some fried green chilies and some chutney on the side. It is not only eaten for brunch or snack but also for breakfast.
Though vada pav emerged as a street food in mumbai, it is also served in restaurants and chaat houses in India and abroad. One can find various versions of assembling these. The way vada is made is almost same in all places, but the chutney used differs from place to place.
One can find these just served with a garlic chutney in the sandwich, while other versions come with a sweet tamarind chutney, green chutney and dry garlic chutney made with dried coconut & peanuts.
Making vada pav may look lengthy but it is easy if the chutneys used are prepared ahead. You can make them the previous day and refrigerate. 
When I made vada pav recipe this time I just made the green chutney and garlic chutney. I did not prepare the sweet tamarind chutney. It tastes good even without the sweet chutney.
For more Chaats & street foods, you can checkPav bhajiMisal pavMasala puriDahi vadaMasala pavPaapdi chaatSev puri chaat

To make vada pav we will need green chutney, dry garlic chutney and sweet tamarind chutney.
1. First begin by making the dry garlic chutney. Dry roast garlic for 2 to 3 mins. Add red chilies and saute until crisp. Set these aside to cool. In the same pan, saute dried coconut just until hot. Do not over roast or brown it. 
If you like to use peanuts, roast them as well until golden. Cool them all. Powder red chilies first with salt, then blend garlic for a minute. Add coconut and peanuts. 
Blend all together to a coarse powder. You can also add little red chili powder while blending for little color.
2. To make green chutney, blend all the ingredients together with little water as needed. Make a smooth chutney. I have used fried gram to prevent the chutney from turning runny. You can also skip them. Set this aside.
3. Boil or steam peeled potatoes until just done. Make sure they are not mushy. I cooked in a pressure cooker for 2 whistles with little water. Cool them and crumble. Set aside. Make a paste of ginger garlic and green chilli.
4. Heat oil in a pan and add mustard seeds. When they crackle add curry leaves.
5. When they turn crisp, add ginger garlic and chili paste. Saute till the raw smell goes off.
6. Add salt, turmeric, hing and chili powder.
7. Mix everything well.
8. Add potatoes and coriander leaves.
9. Turn off the heat and mix well.
10. Cool completely and make balls.
11. Add besan, rice flour, salt, hing, turmeric and chili powder.
12. Mix everything well. Add water little by little and make a slightly thick batter.
13. Do not make the batter runny as the covering will turn very thin. Add a pinch of soda and mix well. This is optional.
14. Heat oil on a medium flame. When the oil is hot enough, drop a potato ball in the batter and coat it well.
15. Gently drop the batter coated ball in oil.
16. Do not disturb for 2 mins as they may break. After 2 mins keep stirring and fry on a medium heat until golden.
17. Drain them and set aside. You can fry in batches if using a small kadai.
18. Deseed green chilies to prevent bursting in oil.
19. In the same hot oil, partially fry them for a minute. Take care if there are any seeds left they may burst. You will need to fry them lightly.
20. These are the ingredients needed for assembling.
21. Slit a pav bun keeping one end intact. Apply the green chutney on both the sides and sprinkle some garlic chutney. Flatten the vada and then place it in the center. Vada can also be flattened while eating.
Enjoy Vada pav with fried green chilli and chutney. It is good to consume immediately as it turns soggy.

For best results follow the step-by-step photos above the recipe card
Alternative quantities provided in the recipe card are for 1x only, original recipe.
For best results follow my detailed step-by-step photo instructions and tips above the recipe card.
 © Swasthi’s Recipes 
Check your inbox or spam folder to confirm your subscription.
        
 
I’m Swasthi Shreekanth, the recipe developer, food photographer & food writer behind Swasthi's Recipes. My aim is to help you cook great Indian food with my time-tested recipes. After 2 decades of experience in practical Indian cooking I started this blog to help people cook better & more often at home. Whether you are a novice or an experienced cook I am sure Swasthi’s Recipes will assist you to enhance your cooking skills.
Read more..
great recipe, thanks for sharing
Glad you like it Gauri

Hi can these fried chilly can be served with samosa or they are they different from this
Hi,
I don’t know what they serve in India. But here in Singapore in Punjabi restaurants we get the same I showed here plus some chaat masala and cumin powder sprinkled over them.
Can you say the quantity of chat masala and cumin powder pls I mean ratio

Dear Swasthi,
Thank you for the wonderful recipes. I am a Russian, but even I can follow your instructions.
Welcome Alex
Glad to know
Thank you
Nice article???
I made this but I used rosted badam for garlic chutney . It turned out well.And also I want to ask you whether there is any picture uploading system where I can upload the dish I have cooked for sharing
Hi Rhea,
Thank you! Glad it turned out well. Loved your thought of using badam for chutney. I do not have the system to upload pictures yet. Love to see your pictures. Please mail them to contact(at) indianhealthyrecipes (dot) com. You can also send it to swasthisrecipes fb page. Thanks again!
Beautifully explained.
Learned some important tips.
Thanks.
Will try this recipe tomorrow.
I’ve  always used Everest sambar masala. I’ll  try your recipe.
Hi,
You are welcome. Glad you liked it! Yes do try!
It’s all great recipe’s like it very much really
Thank you!
U r the best ,ur recipe always help me I recently got married and before marriage I had never cooked anything but ur recipe made me a superb cook ,they r so well written that I never get confused, amazing
Hi Manu,
Thank you so much for the comment. I am really happy to know the recipes are useful. Wishing you both the best!
🙂

Vada pav turned out great only thing was my garlic chutney turned out too pungent. So I added some roasted peanuts. Thank you so much! We had a hearty weekend dinner along with your hakka noodles.

Dear Swasthi
Your recipes are superb. A group of friends together ventured into making vada pav, pav bhaji and some kababs for a chaat party. All of them turned out superb. Thank you so much!!

Hi Swasthi,
The recipe looks yummy. Can you pls let me know how to divide the recipe and make ahead. If i can make the vada previous day
Hi Rekha
Sorry forgot to reply you in time. You can make the potato stuffing 1 day ahead and refrigerate, Dry garlic chutney and green chutney can be made 1 to 2 days ahead. Just make the batata vada the same day just before serving. Bring the chutney to room temperature and use. Hope this helps


















© 2012 - 2022 - Swasthi's Recipes. The content is copyrighted to SWASTHI'S and may not be reproduced in any form.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vada_pav

Vada pav, alternatively spelt wada pao, (listen) is a vegetarian fast food dish native to the state of Maharashtra. The dish consists of a deep fried potato dumpling placed inside a bread bun (pav) sliced almost in half through the middle. It is generally accompanied with one or more chutneys and a green chili pepper.[1] Although it originated as an affordable street food in Mumbai, it is now served in food stalls and restaurants across India. It is also called Bombay burger[2] in keeping with its origins and its resemblance in physical form to a burger.[3]

The most famous snack in Mumbai, vada pav is claimed to be a part of the culture of Mumbaikars.[4][5]

Batata vada in Marathi literally means "potato fritter". It is a combination of the word for "potato" (batata) and vada, a type of fried savoury snack. Pav is a derivative of the Portuguese word pão, which means bread.

The most common theory of the vada pav's origin is that it was invented in the erstwhile mill-heartland of Central Mumbai. 
Ashok Vaidya of Dadar is often credited with starting the first vada pav stall outside Dadar railway station in 1966.[6][7][8]: 34  Some sources credit Sudhakar Mhatre who started his business around the same time.[9] One of the earliest kiosks selling vada pav is said to be Khidki Vada Pav, located in Kalyan. It was started in the late 1960s by the Vaze family, who used to hand out vada pavs from a window (Khidki) of their house facing the road.[9]

The carbohydrate-rich snack catered to the cotton mill workers of what was then known as Girangaon. This potato dumpling (batata vada) placed inside a pav was quick to make, cheap (~10-15 paisa in 1971[9][10]), and much convenient over the batata bhaji and chapati combination, which couldn't be eaten in overcrowded local trains.[7][9]

Vada pav is intricately linked with the Shiv Sena political party. The closing of textile mills in central Mumbai led to turmoil in the 1970s. Shiv Sena, the homegrown party formed during this transformative time, based itself as a party with Mill workers' interests.[11]
The party chief, Balasaheb Thackeray encouraged Marathi people in the 1960s to become entrepreneurs, i.e. start food stalls in ways similar to the South Indians setting up Udupi restaurants.[6][7][12] Shiv Sena attempted to physically and ideologically claim the streets through agitations as well as neighborhood-level events such as Vada pav sammelan (Vada pav jamboree).[8]: 28 [11] This theme has continued even in the recent years, e.g. the 2009 introduction of Shiv vada pav.[13]

There are over 20,000 stalls selling vada pav in Mumbai.[14] Mumbai alone has many variations of the food based on the locality.[10] Large fast food restaurant chains such as Kunjvihar Jumbo King in Mulund and Goli Vada Pav also primarily serve vada pav.[10][15] Outside of Mumbai, a variant of vada pav is pav vada which is famous in Nashik.

Annually, August 23 is celebrated as World Vada Paav Day.[16]

A boiled potato is mashed and mixed with chopped green chilli and garlic, mustard seeds, and spices (usually asafoetida and turmeric). The mass is then shaped into a ball, dipped into gram flour batter and deep fried. The resultant fritter is served by placing inside a bread bun, accompanied with one or more chutneys and fried green chilli.[5]

Pictoral description of the ingredients and recipe of vada pav.

One batata (potato) vada, two vada pavs, raw green chillies, and seasoning of red garlic chutney.

Vada pav served with a side of green chilli pepper, red peanut and garlic chutney, and green chutney.

Vada Pavu (local variant of spelling) and a cup of tea in Mysore.

